Neuro-sama is a chatbot styled after a female VTuber that hosts livestreams on the Twitch channel "vedal987". Her speech and personality are generated by an artificial intelligence (AI) system which utilizes a large language model, allowing her to communicate with viewers in a live chat. She was created by a computer programmer and AI-developer named Vedal, who decided to build upon the concept of an AI VTuber by combining interactions between AI gameplay and a computer-generated avatar. She debuted on Twitch on December 19, 2022 after four years of development.
Development
Neuro-sama was created by developer vedal987. Her responses to the audience are generated from a large language model, with a text-to-speech application converts into a "cutesy voice". According to Vedal, a separate AI model controls her in-game actions when she plays video games. In an interview with Bloomberg, he said that Neuro-sama was his full-time job.
After four years of development, Neuro-sama debuted on Twitch on December 19, 2022. Her new design was implemented on May 27, 2023.
Online content
The chatbot's Twitch content primarily centers around playing video games, notably osu! (2007), in which her gameplay once defeated the best human player in the world, and Minecraft (2011), in which her adaptations to sandbox gameplay have gained notoriety. Other aspects of her content delivery include singing songs and reacting to YouTube videos. While playing games or participating in other activities, the AI frequently engages with viewers by responding to their questions and acknowledging donations. Her comedic and sometimes controversial responses to the live chat have gone viral, accelerating the rise in popularity. Her fanbase has dubbed itself "The Swarm".
Controversy
On January 11, 2023, the Twitch channel received a temporary ban for unspecified "hateful conduct", likely stemming from controversial statements made by the AI, including skepticism surrounding the validity of the Holocaust during a stream. Vedal implemented more measures to prevent Neuro-sama from making offensive statements after this occurred. The channel was unbanned on January 25, 2023 and quickly surpassed 100,000 followers. Upon returning to Twitch, Neuro-sama's content expanded to include live reactions to content creators and streamers, as well as collaborations with other VTubers.