Hospitals have the ability to drain the very last drop of hope from anyone visiting them. That was why, on my last visit to the hospital, I had insisted to the nurses that we should stay in a different room. The same room had been occupied by my best friend's mother, a woman in her sixties. My friend's mother had had breast cancer, and in her last week she'd been hooked up to a machine that helped her breathe. It was a machine that caused a lot of discomfort. The worst of it had been the smell of her body. It was as if the cancer had caused her skin to break down. In my own mind, I thought that this smell might have contributed to the fact that she'd been in a constant state of unconsciousness. That had suited me, though. It meant that I didn't have to talk to her. It meant that I didn't have to lie. It meant that I didn't have to face her with a smile when she had given up everything.
So when I entered that hospital room for the last time and found myself staring into the blank eyes of an unconscious woman, I felt like it was a message from God. If you don't like how I'm running things, just say so. If you don't like me, if you want me to stop, then all you have to do is just die. It was an opportunity for me to join her, to stop lying, to stop pretending. To stop hurting.
"There's something wrong with him," said the nurse, staring into my face, and for a moment I thought that the machine had stopped and that this was what she was telling me. "Do you understand what I'm saying? There's something wrong with him."
I reached out and put my hand on hers, the only gesture I was capable of making, and I looked at her with eyes as empty as the woman's beside me. "I understand," I said. "Don't worry about him."
I don't know how long I lay there staring into the woman's face, but eventually I had the realization that I couldn't stay any longer. That was why I stood up, slowly and quietly, and made my way back out of the hospital. I didn't say goodbye to the nurse or the doctor, I just left. I didn't feel like talking.